FLIm-Based in Vivo Classiﬁcation of Residual Cancer in the Surgical Cavity During Transoral Robotic Surgery Mohamed A. Hassan1, Brent Weyers1, Julien Bec1,Jinyi Qi1, Dorina Gui2, Arnaud Bewley3, Marianne Abouyared3, Gregory Farwell4, Andrew Birkeland3, and Laura Marcu1(B) 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Davis, USA lmarcu@ucdavis.edu 2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA 3 Department of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, Davis, USA 4 Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA Abstract. Incomplete surgical resection with residual cancer left in the surgical cavity is a potential sequelae of Transoral Robotic Surgery (TORS). To minimize such risk, surgeons rely on intraoperative frozen sections analysis (IFSA) to locate and remove the remaining tumor. This process, may lead to false negatives and is time-consuming. Mesoscopic ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging (FLIm) of tissue ﬂuorophores (i.e., collagen and metabolic co-factors NADH and FAD) emission has demonstrated the potential to demarcate the extent of head and neck cancer in patients undergoing surgical procedures of the oral cavity and the oropharynx. Here, we demonstrate the ﬁrst label-free FLIm-based classiﬁcation using a novelty detection model to identify residual cancer in the surgical cavity of the oropharynx. Due to highly imbalanced label representation in the surgical cavity, the model employed solely FLIm data from healthy surgical cavity tissue for training and classiﬁed the residual tumors as an anomaly. FLIm data from N = 22 patients undergoing upper aerodigestive oncologic surgery were used to train and validate the classiﬁcation model using leave-one-patient-out cross-validation. Our approach identiﬁed all patients with positive surgical margins (N = 3) conﬁrmed by pathology. Furthermore, the proposed method reported a point-level sensitivity of 0.75 and a speciﬁcity of 0.78 across optically interrogated tissue surface for all N = 22 patients. The results indicate that the FLIm-based classiﬁcation model can identify residual cancer by directly imaging the surgical cavity, potentially enabling intraoperative surgical guidance for TORS. Keywords: TORS · Positive Surgical Margin · FLIm · Head and Neck Oncology Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43996-4_56. © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 H. Greenspan et al. (Eds.): MICCAI 2023, LNCS 14228, pp. 587–596, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43996-4_56 M. A. Hassan et al. 1 Introduction Residual tumor in the cavity after head and neck cancer (HNC) surgery is a signiﬁcant concern as it increases the risk of cancer recurrence and can negatively impact the patient’s prognosis [1]. HNC comprises the third highest positivesurgical margins (PSM) rate across all oncology ﬁelds [2]. Achieving clear margins can be challenging in some cases, particularly in tumors with involved deep margins [3, 4]. During transoral robotic surgery (TORS), surgeons may assess the surgical margin via visual inspection, palpation of the excised specimen and intraoperative frozen sections analysis (IFSA) [5]. In the surgical cavity, surgeons visually inspect for residual tumors and use specimen driven or defect-driven frozen section analysis to identify any residual tumor [6, 7]. The latter involves slicing a small portion of the tissue at the edge of the cavity and performing a frozen section analysis. These approaches are error-prone and can result in PSMs and a higher risk of cancer recurrence [7]. In an effort to improve these results, recent studies reported the use of exogenous ﬂuorescent markers [8] and wide-ﬁeld optical coherence tomography [9] to inspect PSMs in the excised specimen. While promising, each modality presents certain limitations (e.g., time-consuming analysis, administration of a contrast agent, controlled lighting environment), which has limited their clinical adoption [10, 11]. Label-free mesoscopic ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging (FLIm) has been demonstrated as an intraoperative imaging guidance technique with high classiﬁcation performance (AUC = 0.94) in identifying in vivo tumor margins at the epithelial surface prior to tumor excision [12]. FLIm can generate optical contrast using autoﬂuorescence derived from tissue ﬂuorophores such as collagen, NADH, and FAD. Due to the sensitivity of these ﬂuorophores to their microenvironment, the presence of tumor changes their emission properties (i.e., intensity and lifetime characteristics) relative to healthy tissue, thereby enabling the optical detection of cancer [13]. However, ability of label-free FLIm to identify residual tumors in vivo in the surgical cavity (deep margins) has not been reported. One signiﬁcant challenge in developing a FLIm-based classiﬁer to detect tumor in the surgical cavity is the presence of highly imbalanced labels. Surgeons aim to perform an en bloc resection, removing the entire tumor and a margin of healthy tissue around it to ensure complete excision. Therefore, in most cases, only healthy tissue in left in the cavity. To address the technical challenge of highly imbalanced label distribution and the need for intraoperative real-time cavity imaging, we developed an intraoperative FLIm guidance model to identify residual tumors by classifying residual cancer as anomalies. Our proposed approach identiﬁed all patients with PSM. In contrast, the IFSA reporting a sensitivity of 0.5 [6, 7]. Fig. 1. Overview methodology of the label-free FLIm-based intraoperative surgical guidance, data collection, histopathology registration, and data processing. Upper panel: overview of developing the classiﬁcation method to detect residual HNC in the surgical cavity during the TORS procedure. Lower panel: describes the workﬂow involving generating labels for classiﬁer training and testing. The labels were derived directly from histopathology, evaluated, and annotated by a clinical pathologist (DG). Each annotated H&E section was registered with the ex vivo and in vivo FLIm scan images. The red annotations correspond to cancer labels, and the green annotations correspond to healthy. 2Method As illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed method uses a clinically-compatible FLIm system coupled to the da Vinci SP transoral robotic surgical platform to scan the surgical cavity in vivo and acquire FLIm data. We used the cumulative distribution transform (CDT) of the ﬂuorescence decay curves extracted from the FLIm data as the input feature. The novelty detection model classiﬁed FLIm points closer to the healthy distribution as healthy and further from the healthy distribution as a residual tumor. We implemented the image guidance by augmenting the classiﬁcation map to the surgical view using the predictor output and point locations of the scan. 2.1 FLIm Hardware and Data Acquisition This study used a multispectral ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging (FLIm) device to acquire data [14]. The FLIm device features a 355 nm UV laser for ﬂuorescence excitation, which is pulsed at a 480 Hz repetition rate. A 365 µm multimode optical ﬁber (0.22 NA) delivers excitation light to tissue and relays the corresponding ﬂuorescence signal to a set of dichroic mirrors and bandpass ﬁlters to spectrally resolve the autoﬂuorescence. Three variable gain UV enhanced Si APD modules with integrated trans-impedance ampliﬁers receive the autoﬂuorescence, which is spectrally resolved as follows: (1) M. A. Hassan et al. 390/40 nm attributed to collagen autoﬂuorescence, (2) 470/28 nm to NADH, and (3) 542/50 nm to FAD. The resulting autoﬂuorescence waveform measurements for each channel are averaged four times, thus with a 480 Hz excitation rate, resulting in 120 averaged measurements per second [15]. The FLIm device includes a 440 nm continuous wave laser that serves as an aiming beam; this aiming beam enables real-time visualization of the locations where ﬂuorescence (point measurements) is collected by generating visible blue illumination at the location where data is acquired. Segmentation of the ‘aiming beam’ allows for FLIm data points to be localized as pixel coordinates within a surgical white light image (see Fig. 1). Localization of these coordinates is essential to link the regions where data is obtained to histopathology, which is used as the ground truth to link FLIm optical data to pathology status [16]. Table 1. Anatomy, Surgical outcome, and Tissue label breakdown for the 22 patients Surgical Outcome  No. Patients  Tissue Label  No. FLIm Points  Clear margin  19 3  Healthy Cancer  170,535 2,451 PSM  FLIm data was acquired using the da Vinci SP robotic surgical platform. As part of the approved protocol for this study, the surgeon performed in vivo FLIm scan on the tumor epithelial surface and the surrounding uninvolved benign tissue. Upon completing the scan, the surgeon proceeded with en bloc excision of the tissue suspected of cancer. An ex vivo FLIm scan was then performed on the surgically excised specimen. Finally, the patient’s surgical cavity was scanned to check for residual tumor. 2.2 Patient Cohort and FLIm Data Labeling The research was performed under the approval of the UC Davis Institutional Review Board (IRB) and with the patient’s informed consent. All Patients were anesthetized, intubated, and prepared for surgery as part of the standard of care. N = 22 patients are represented in this study, comprising HNC in the palatine tonsil (N = 15) and the base of the tongue (N = 7). For each patient, the operating surgeon conducted an en bloc surgical tumor resection procedure (achieved by TORS-electrocautery instruments), and the resulting excised specimen was sent to a surgical pathology room for grossing. The tissue specimenwas seriallysectionedtogeneratetissue slices,whichwerethenformalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded, sectioned, and stained to create Hematoxylin & Eosin (H&E) slides for pathologist interpretation (see Fig. 1). After the surgical excision of the tumor, an in vivo FLIm scan of approximately 90 s was conducted within the patient’s surgical cavity, where the tumor was excised. To validate optical measurementsto pathology labels (e.g., benigntissue vs. residualtumor), pathology labels from the excision margins were digitally annotated by a pathologist on each H&E section. The aggregate of H&E sections was correspondingly labeled on the ex vivo specimen at the cut lines where the tissue specimen was serially sectioned. Thereafter, the labels were spatially registered in vivo within the surgical cavity. This process enables the direct validation of FLIm measurements to the pathology status of the electrocauterized surgical margins (see Table 1). 2.3 FLIm Preprocessing The raw FLIm waveform contains background noise, instrument artifacts, and other types of interference, which need to be carefully processed and analyzed to extract meaningful information (i.e., the ﬂuorescence signal decay characteristics). To account for background noise, the background signal acquired at the beginning of each clinical case was subtracted from the measured raw FLIm waveform. To retrieve the ﬂuorescence function, we used a non-parametric model based on a Laguerre expansion polynomials and a constrained least-square deconvolution with the instrument impulse response function as previously described [17]. In addition, an SNR threshold of ≥50 dB was applied as a ﬁltering criterion to select FLIm points with good signal quality. 2.4 Novelty Detection Model The state-of-the-art novelty detection models were comprehensively reviewed in the literature [18, 19]. Due to its robust performance, we chose the Generalized One-class Discriminative Subspaces (GODS) classiﬁcation model [20] to classify healthy FLIm points from the residual tumor. The model trained only on the healthy FLIm points and use a semi-supervised technique to classify residual tumor from healthy. The GODS is a pairwise complimentary classiﬁer deﬁned by two separating hyperplanes to minimize the distance between the two classiﬁers, limiting the healthy FLIm data within the smallest volume and maximizing the margin between the hyperplanes and the data, thereby avoiding overﬁtting while improving classiﬁcation robustness. The ﬁrst hyperplane (w1, b1) projects most of the healthy FLIm points to the positive half of the space, whereas the second hyperplane (w2, b2) projects most of the FLIm points in the negative half. n 21 &#2;&#2; 2min F =WjTxi + bj&#4; d ,b 2W ∈SK 2n i=1 j=1 &#2;&#3;&#4; &#5;&#6;2 &#3;&#4; &#5;&#6;2ν + η − min W1 Txi + b1 + η − max W2 Txi + b2 (1)2π + &#2; i where W1, W2 are the orthonormal frames, min is the Stiefel manifold, η is the W ∈SdK ,b sensitivity margin, and was set η = 0.4 for our experiments. ν denote a penalty factor on these soft constraints, and b is the biases. xi denotes the training set containing CDT of the concatenated FLIm decay curve across channels 1–3 along the time axis. The CDT of the concatenated decay curves is computed as follows: Normalize the decay curves to 0–1. Compute and normalize the cumulative distribution function (CDF). Transforming the normalized CDF into the cumulative distribution transform by taking the inverse cumulative distribution function of the normalized CDF [21]. M. A. Hassan et al. 2.5 Classiﬁer Training and Evaluation The novelty detection model used for detecting residual cancer is evaluated at the pointmeasurement level to assess the diagnostic capability of the method over an entire tissue surface. The evaluation followed a leave-one-patient-out cross-validation approach. The study further compared GODS with two other novelty detection models: robust covariance and, one-class support vector machine (OC-SVM) [22]. Novelty detection model solely used healthy labels from the in vivo cavity scan for training. The testing data contained both healthy and residual cancer labels. We used grid search to optimize the hyper-parameters and features used in each model and are tabulated in the supplementary section Table S1. The sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and accuracy were used as evaluation metrics to assess the performance of classiﬁcation models in the context of the study. Results of a binary classiﬁcation model using SVM are also shown in the supplementary section Table S2. 2.6 Classiﬁer Augmented Display The classiﬁeraugmentationdepends onthree independent processingsteps: aiming beam localization, motion correction, and interpolation of the point measurements. A detailed description of implementing the augmentation process is discussed in [23]. The interpolation consists of ﬁtting a disk to the segmented aiming beam pixel location for each point measurement and applying a color map (e.g., green: healthy and red: cancer) for each point prediction. Individual pixels from overlapping disks are averaged to produce the overall classiﬁcation map and augmented to the surgical ﬁeld as a transparent overlay. 3 Results Table 2 tabulates the classiﬁcation performance comparison of novelty detection models for classifying residual cancer vs. healthy on in vivo FLIm scans in the cavity. Three noveltydetectionmodels were evaluated, andall threemodels could identify the presence of residual tumors in the cavity for the three patients. However, the extent of the tumor classiﬁcation over the entire tissue surface varied among the models. The GODS reported the best classiﬁcation performance with an average sensitivity of 0.75 ± 0.02 (see Fig. 2). The lower standard deviation indicates that the model generalizes well. The OC-SVM and robust covariance reported a high standard deviation, indicating that the performance of the classiﬁcation model is inconsistent across different patients. The model’s ability to correctly identify negative instances is essential to its reliability. The GODS model reported the highest mean speciﬁcity of 0.78 ± 0.14 and the lowest standard deviation. The Robust Covariance model reported the lowest speciﬁcity, classifying larger portions of healthy tissue in the cavity as a residual tumor; indicating that the model did not generalize well to the healthy labels. We also observed that changing the hyper-parameter, such as the anomaly factor, biased the model toward a single class indicating overﬁtting (see supplementary section Fig. S1). The GODS uses two separating hyperplanes to minimize the distance between the two classiﬁers by learning a low-dimensional subspace containing FLIm data properties Table 2. Classiﬁcation performance comparison of novelty detection models for classifying residualcancervs. healthyoninvivoFLImscansinthe cavity,mean(sd). Bold font: Best-performing model. Novelty Detection Model  Sensitivity (N = 3)  Speciﬁcity (N = 22)  Accuracy (N = 3)  OC-SVM  0.68 (0.13)  0.72 (0.18)  0.58 (0.14)  Robust Covariance  0.67 (0.15)  0.63 (0.17)  0.49 (0.11)  GODS  0.75 (0.02)  0.78 (0.14)  0.76 (0.02)  of healthy labels. Residual tumor labels are detected by calculating the distance between the projected data points and the learned subspace. Points that are far from the subspace are classiﬁed as residual tumors. We observed that the GODS with the FLIm decay curves in the CDT space achieve the best classiﬁcation performance compared to other novelty detection models with a mean accuracy of 0.76 ± 0.02. This is mainly due to the robustness of the model, the ability to handle high-dimensional data, and the contrast in the FLIm decay curves. The contrast in the FLIm decay curves was further improved in the CDT space by transforming the FLIm decay curves to a normalized scale and improving linear separability. 4 Discussion Curent study demonstrates that label-free FLIm parameters-based classiﬁcation model, using a novelty detection aproach, enables identiﬁcation of residual tumors in the surgical cavity. The proposed model can resolve residual tumor at the point-measurement level over a tissue surface. The model reported low point-level false negatives and positives. Moreover, the current approach correctly identiﬁed all patients with PSMs (see Fig. 2). This enhances surgical precision for TORS procedures otherwise limited to visual inspection of the cavity, palpation of the excised specimen, and IFSA. The FLImbased classiﬁcation model could help guide the surgical team in real-time, providing information on the location and extent of cancerous tissue. In context to the standard of care, the proposed residual tumor detection model exhibits high patient-level sensitivity (sensitivity = 1) in detecting patients with PSMs. In contrast, defect-driven IFSA reports a patient-level sensitivity of 0.5 [6, 7]. Our approach exhibits a low patient-level speciﬁcity compared to IFSA. Surgeons aim to achieve negative margins, meaning the absence of cancer cells at the edges of the tissue removed during surgery. The ﬁnding of positive margins from ﬁnal histology would result in additional surgical resection, potentially impacting the quality of life. Combining the proposed approach and IFSA could lead to an image-guided frozen section analysis to help surgeons achieve negative margins in a more precise manner. Therefore, completely resecting cancerous tissue and improving patient outcomes. The false positive predictions from the classiﬁcation model presented two trends: false positives in an isolated region and false positives spreading across a larger region. Isolated false positives are often caused by the noise of the FLIm system and are M. A. Hassan et al. Fig. 2. GODS classiﬁcation overlay of in vivo cavity scans of three patients presenting with residual tumor. The columns represent each patient, and the rows depict the ground truth labels, thepoint-prediction overlay, and the augmentedsurgicalview.FPR-False Positive Rate, FNR-False Negative Rate. accounted for by the interpolation approach used for the classiﬁer augmentation (refer to supplementary section Fig. S2). On the other hand, false positives spreading across a larger region are much more complex to interpret. One insight is that the electrocautery effects on the tissues in the cavity may have inﬂuenced them [24]. According to Jackson’s burn wound model, the thermal effects caused by electrocautery vary with the different burnt zones. We observed a correlation between a larger spread of false positive predictions associated with a zone of coagulation to a zone of hyperemia. The novelty detection model generalizes to the healthy labels and considers data falling off the healthy distribution as residual cancer. The FLIm properties associated with the healthy labels in the cavity are heterogeneous due to the electrocautery effects. Electrocautery effects are mainly thermal and can be observed by the levels of charring in the tissue. Reﬁning the training labels based on the levels of charring could lead to a more homogeneous representation of the training set and result in an improved classiﬁcation model with better generalization. 5 Conclusion This study demonstrates a novel FLIm-based classiﬁcation method to identify residual cancer in the surgical cavity of the oropharynx. The preliminary results underscore the signiﬁcance of the proposed method in detecting PSMs. The model will be validated on a larger patient cohort in future work and address the limitations of the point-level false positive and negative predictions. This work may enhance surgical precision for TORS procedures as an adjunctive technique in combination with IFSA. Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant 2R01CA187427 in collaboration with Intuitive Surgical, Inc; and P41-EB032840-01. Authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Jonathan Sorger (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale CA) for his support forour ongoing industry collaboration; key areas of his industry support include FLIm visualization aspects and integration of FLIm ﬁber optic probes into the da Vinci SP TORS platform. References 1. Gorphe, P., Simon, C.: A systematic review and meta-analysis of margins in transoral surgery for oropharyngeal carcinoma. Oral Oncol. 98, 69–77 (2019) 2. Orosco, R.K., et al.: Positive surgical margins in the 10 most common solid cancers. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 1–9 (2018) 3. Li, M.M., Puram, S.V., Silverman, D.A., Old, M.O., Rocco, J.W., Kang, S.Y.: Margin analysis in head and neck cancer: state of the art and future directions. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 26(12), 4070–4080 (2019) 4. Williams, M.D.: Determining adequate margins in head and neck cancers: practice and continued challenges. Curr. Oncol. Rep. 18(9), 1–7 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-0160540-y 5. Poupore, N.S., Chen, T., Nguyen, S.A., Nathan, C.-A.O., Newman, J.G.: Transoral robotic surgery for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil versus base of tongue: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancers (Basel) 14(15), 3837 (2022) 6. Nentwig, K., Unterhuber, T., Wolff, K.-D., Ritschl, L.M., Nieberler, M.: The impact of intraoperative frozen section analysis on ﬁnal resection margin status, recurrence, and patient outcome with oral squamous cell carcinoma. Clin. Oral Investig. 25, 6769–6777 (2021) 7. Horwich, P., et al.: Specimen oriented intraoperative margin assessment in oral cavity and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. J. Otolaryngol. -Head Neck Surg. 50(1), 1–12 (2021) 8. van Keulen, S., et al.: Rapid, non-invasive ﬂuorescence margin assessment: optical specimen mapping in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Oral Oncol. 88, 58–65 (2019) 9. Badhey, A.K., et al.: Intraoperative use of wide-ﬁeld optical coherence tomography to evaluate tissue microstructure in the oral cavity and oropharynx. JAMA Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 149(1), 71–78 (2023) 10. Zhang, R.R., et al.: Beyond the margins: Real-time detection of cancer using targeted ﬂuorophores. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 14(6), 347–364 (2017) 11. Wu, C., Gleysteen, J., Teraphongphom, N.T., Li, Y., Rosenthal, E.: In-vivo optical imaging in head and neck oncology: Basic principles, clinical applications and future directions review-Article.Int.J.OralSci. 10(2), 10 (2018) M. A. Hassan et al. 12. Hassan, M.A., et al.: Anatomy-speciﬁc classiﬁcation model using label-free FLIm to aid intraoperative surgical guidance of head and neck cancer. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 1–11 (2023) 13. Marcu, L., French, P.M.W., Elson, D.S.: Fluorescence Lifetime Spectroscopy and Imaging : Principles and Applications in Biomedical Diagnostics. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2014) 14. Gorpas, D., et al.: Autoﬂuorescence lifetime augmented reality as a means for real-time robotic surgery guidance in human patients. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 1187 (2019) 15. Zhou, X., Bec, J., Yankelevich, D., Marcu, L.: Multispectral ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging device with a silicon avalanche photodetector. Opt. Express 29(13), 20105 (2021) 16. Weyers, B.W., et al.: Fluorescence lifetime imaging for intraoperative cancer delineation in transoral robotic surgery. Transl. Biophotonics 1(1–2), e201900017 (2019) 17. Liu, J., Sun, Y., Qi, J., Marcu, L.: A novel method for fast and robust estimation of ﬂuorescence decay dynamics using constrained least-squares deconvolution with Laguerre expansion. Phys.Med.Biol. 57(4), 843–865 (2012) 18. Perera, P., Oza, P., Patel, V.M.: One-class classiﬁcation: a survey (2021) 19. Seliya, N., Abdollah Zadeh, A., Khoshgoftaar, T.M.: A literature review on one-class classiﬁcation and its potential applications in big data. J. Big Data 8(1), 1–31 (2021) 20. Cherian, A., Wang, J.: Generalized one-class learning using pairs of complementary classiﬁers. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 44, 6993–7009 (2022) 21. Rubaiyat, A.H.M., Hallam, K.M., Nichols, J.M., Hutchinson, M.N., Li, S., Rohde, G.K.: Parametric signal estimation using the cumulative distribution transform. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 68, 3312–3324 (2020) 22. Pedregosa, F., et al.: Scikit-learn: machine learning in python (2011) 23. Gorpas, D., Ma, D., Bec, J., Yankelevich, D.R., Marcu, L.: Real-time visualization of tissue surface biochemical features derived from ﬂuorescence lifetime measurements. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 35(8), 1802–1811 (2016) 24. Lagarto, J.L., et al.: Electrocautery effects on ﬂuorescence lifetime measurements: an in vivo study in the oral cavity. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 185, 90–99 (2018) 